Depression & Mood Disorders

Depression is a potentially life threatening disorder characterized by depressed mood, loss of pleasure in activities, decreased energy, disturbed sleep / wake cycle and self-destructive thoughts. Milder forms go unrecognized and compromise quality of life.

Treatment includes psychotherapy and antidepressant medication. Efficacy of CBT and psychodynamic therapy has been shown in numerous studies.
	
Sometimes depressive episodes are accompanied by mania which includes excess energy, grandiose delusions, pressured speech, and disinhibition. Hypomania is a mild form of mania. These occur in Bipolar disorder. Treatment consists of mood stabilizing medication and therapy to help individuals recognize early signs of the illness and manage triggers to the episode.

Anxiety Disorders

Anxiety allows us to be alert and take action when needed. But when it becomes overwhelming and paralyzes us, treatment can help.

Generalized Anxiety disorder is a condition of excess worry, feeling on edge, fatigue, poor concentration, irritability, muscle tension, and insomnia. Panic attacks are waves of intense anxiety with physical symptoms such as palpitations, sweating, trembling, shortness of breath, choking, chest pain, nausea, dizziness, chills, numbness, fear of dying, or even derealization (a feeling of unreality).

These conditions lead to avoidance of normal activities, and cause significant distress. Treatment restores functioning and quality of life. A combination of CBT and an understanding of the triggers of anxiety can be helpful.

Anxiolytic (?) and antidepressant medications are indicated for Generalized Anxiety Disorder and Panic Attacks. Relaxation techniques, meditation, and yoga play a role as well as enhanced leisure activities.

Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is a specific anxiety disorder that includes obsessions: recurrent thoughts that are experienced as unwanted and compulsions: repetitive behaviors the individual feels driven to perform.

Studies show the efficacy of antidepressant medication and a specific type of CBT referred to as " exposure and response prevention."

Post Traumatic Stress Disorder

When trauma strikes, it can be devastating. For some, we never expect it. For the other brave individuals who put themselves in harm's way, you do not expect the profound impact. Sometimes there are lasting effects such as nightmares, flashbacks, irritability, insomnia, loss of interest in activities, estrangement from others, UNKNOWN WORD, hypervigilance, and avoidance of things that remind you of the trauma.

You do not have to suffer for your service or misfortune. A specific form of CBT called cognitive reprogramming is indicated for PTSD. The trauma is worked through and detoxified very slowly. Several different medications are also available and are sometimes used to facilitate the therapy.

Sleep

The most important part of treating sleep problems is a complete evaluation. Insomnia is often a symptom of other problems such as Depression, Bipolar disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, PTSD, Schizophrenia or Substance Abuse. Primary sleep disorders including parasomnia, Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Restless Leg Syndrome, and UNKNOWN WORD Rhythm Sleep / Wake Disorder should be considered.

Once I have a thorough understanding of what is causing your insomnia, there are many appropriate and effective treatments from sleep hygiene, to CBT, to a host of medications to ensure a good night's sleep. Which, of course, we all need!

Geriatric Psychiatry

The aging process is as unique as the human experience. Everyone will experience the last third of his or her life differently. If you need help with aging gracefully, dealing with loss or medical problems, dealing with new or old psychiatric issues, or looking back over your life and taking an inventory, I am happy to help.

My interest and expertise in medical and psychological issues of aging go back to 1989. I completed a Geriatric Fellowship at Georgetown during my training, was board certified, and renewed my certification in 2016. I bring a vast body of experience and training to my practice and your care.

These are some examples of my areas of interest. Others include grief, relationships, medical illness, life transitions, and other psychiatric diagnoses..


Please note that I am unable to travel to homes or facilities for visits, and do not accept Medicare or other insurance.



psychodynamic disinhibition hypomania derealization anxiolytic hypervigilance parasomnia 